---
title: "coiaf: complexity of infection estimation with allele frequencies"
author: Paschalidis A., Watson O. J., Verity R., Bailey J. A.
date: 2021-11-19
slug: coiaf

categories:
  - Poster Presentation
  - Research
tags:
  - COI
  - Allele Frequency

summary: 'A software package that incorporates two new methods that use easily
calculated measures to directly estimate the complexity of infection (COI) from
sequence read depth data.'

# links:
# - icon: images
#   icon_pack: fas
#   name: Poster
#   url: https://cslide-us.ctimeetingtech.com/hrs20/attendee/eposter/poster/1433
---

## Abstract

Polyclonal or complex malarial infections can provide insight into the genetic
diversity and population structure of parasites as well as their transmission
and within-host dynamics. The proportion of complex infections and the
complexity of infection (COIâ€”the number of strains infecting an individual) have
been shown to be the most informative for inferring transmission intensity.
Current state-of-the-art methods to estimate the COI such as THE REAL McCOIL are
computationally intensive when working with a large number of samples or
numerous genetic loci. In this study, we determined two relationships that tie
the population-level minor allele frequency and the within-sample frequency of
the minor allele to estimate the COI. We derived easily calculable measures to
directly estimate the COI from these parameters that are easily obtained from
sequencing read depth data. Our methods are computationally efficient,
estimating the COI of samples in less than a second, and perform well on
simulated data. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our methods are comparably
accurate to current methods in the literature. We apply both THE REAL McCOIL and
our new methods to estimate the COI for 5,970 P. falciparum samples from 28
malaria-endemic countries collected as part of Pf3k (release 6). We explore the
global heterogeneity of the COI and characterize the relationship between
malaria prevalence at the time of sample collection and the COI. Lastly, we
detail how our methods can be used to explore further within-sample parasite
information, including the relatedness of parasites within mixed infections.

## Citation

Paschalidis A, Watson OJ, Verity RJ, Bailey JA. Complexity of Infection
Estimation with Allele Frequencies. Presented at: American Society of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene Annual Meeting; November 19, 2021; Virtual.

<!---
```bibtex
@misc{paschalidis_complexity_2021,
	address = {Virtual},
	title = {Complexity of {Infection} {Estimation} with {Allele} {Frequencies}},
	language = {English},
	author = {Paschalidis, Aris and Watson, Oliver J. and Verity, Robert J. and Bailey, Jeffrey A.},
	month = nov,
	year = {2021},
}
```
--->
